# transformations in the time domain

The pace of a messaging conversation mirrors in a general sense the pace of speech, if it were proportionally stretched in the horizontal time domain. While we use sentence-to-sentence pacing signifiers from traditional text (punctuation) there is a second larger rhythmic structure at play here, the "meta-rhythm" measured in the amount of time between each individual message.

The instantaneous nature of messaging artificially re-inserts the overall meta-rhythm of a conversation as an underlying means of communication. We substitute the subtextual information contained in the rhythm of speech (measured in beats, breaths, and microscopic hesitations) for the corresponding subtextual information in the meta-rhythm of a message exchange (measured in seconds, minutes, hours, days, weeks, and months). Because messaging is instant, we hold the assumption (consciously or not) that all meta-rhythms in conversation are present by choice. We believe the meta rhythms to be designed by each participant, and purposefully containing premeditated subtext. Whether or not this is "truly" the case is irrelevant, our perception of its reality is what makes it an important component of our interpretation of messaging subtext. 

These meta-rhythms are often used as perceived signifiers of our recipient's level of interest. An instant response  might be perceived as a sign of overeagerness, of lust, desperation, or genuine excitement. A response with a 20 minute wait time might show a more mature or leveled interest, or a slight dismissal. Response times measured in hours often begin to suggest larger overall dynamics of the social power relationship, especially if they are one sided, while response times of days or weeks may suggest a more sincere disinterest (or the opposite). Again, since we perceive the response time as a choice, each of these actions are seen as purposeful subtext provided by the sender. Like all subtext, meta-rhythms are extremely subtle and context dependent. They don't directly say anything by themselves, but over time they contribute to the lens through which we interpret the actual text contained in individual messages. (The binary call and response structure of a messaging conversation also serves to heighten the perceived gravity of each response gap, as we generally send one message, and wait in silence for a response. )

Baudrillard reflects on how the instantaneous nature of communication can leave us with an odd sensation of empty time. While he speaks of telecommunication in the 1980s, this sentiment translates well to the fragmented nature of messaging 

> "And what about time, this vast leisure time we are left with, and which engulfed us like an empty terrain; an expanse rendered futile in its unfolding from the moment that the instantaneousness of communication miniaturizes our exchanges into a series of instants?"

Baudrillard's "series of instants" are phone calls, while our messaging conversations are abstracted and fragmented in an even higher order of magnitude. 

# Seduction (not specific to time domain) 
Another related idea from Baudrillard is that of seduction. In some sense, the vagueness of these subtextual signifiers, their unreliability, serves to pique our interest even more. There is a sexual tension to the continued cycle of reading and rereading messages in the conquest for subtextual truth. We are seduced by the unknown, as Baudrillard says: 

"there is nothing seductive about truth. Only the secret is seductive: the secret which circulates as the rule of the game, as an initiatory form, as a symbolic pact, which no code can resolve, no clue interpret."

Baudrillard further points out a key characteristic of subtext in all forms: it has no true meaning, no ultimate definition: 

"The secret is never the repressed. It is never 'everything you don't know about and have always wanted to know about yourself and sex' (Woody Allen), it is that which no longer pertains to the order of truth  ...  An immediately contagious giddiness: seduction operates through the subtle pleasure which beings and things experience in remaining secret"

So as messaging brings our attention to subtext that we (incorrectly) perceive as increasingly measurable and explicit, we devote a greater amount of our time and energy in the seductive realm of speculative interpretation.

NOTE: This is in some ways the opposite of baudrillard's original ideas of what seduction is. I am taking the liberty here of reappropriating his work because I think these ideas are interesting when placed in this context, but please read the source and form you own opinions on it if you have any interest in further examination of Baudrillard's ideas. 

# archival structure 

The second major structural aspect of messaging that we use as a medium of sorts for subtextual analysis, is its archival permanence. Each response in a chain of messages is automatically preserved including the exact point at which it was received. We primarily conceive of text as instantaneous, but because of this system, it is  also infinite, frozen in time. This endless access lets us assess subtextual elements forever, reading, rereading, reinterpreting, and reconsidering each sign as a minute but concretely tangible point of data for us to refer back to at any time. Each timestamp reiterating the meta-rhythmic subtext of the conversation, now dissected and analyzed holistically, from above. For traditional speech, voice, and video call, we have no recorded map, no reference to conversational subtext, except our own memory which we already understand as fallible. The permanent archive of messages tempts us to endlessly review and recompile our understanding of subtext, and since this archive is an exact replica of the "real" original information, we give our trust to it. We see it as a true compilation of past events. 

We show our archives to our friends to ask for their opinions on subtext, we post our archives online, we even present our archives in courtrooms as evidence. This always on, always recording feature of messaging is so familiar to us that we generally don't think anything of it. Why does the notion of an automatic archival record of phone or video conversations seem so much more invasive? This core uncomfort with recording our voice and video itself demonstrates that we interface with and classify those mediums much differently than text communication.

//The archival nature of text reflects baudrillard's ideas that about how an abundance of information can be a burden, something that clouds our perception rather than clarifies it. While we think that more information will mean more understanding, what we are left with is a claustrophobic sense of infinitely piling information. This contrasts with his idea of seduction, the pleasure we get from the unknown. Baudrillard's opposing structure to seduction is "obscenity" in which information presents itself in destructively explicit way. Archival structure mirrors this concept in that we have free access to any text records we want, but as many of us have experienced, this often  leads to a compulsive need to reread, and reconsider all of our past conversations. 

The most modern and most demonstratively "obscene" aspect of messaging is the "read receipt" now integrated in many messaging applications. The read receipt aims to remove ambiguity, to give us more information, but in doing so it also destroys seduction. It gives us too much information. The read receipt forces us to hypothesize about why someone hasn't responded as we await their next message. It exposes something quite personal, and violates a core privacy of text, which is the idea that you can read and evaluate at your own pace. The read receipt destroys seduction by disallowing our curiosity, while simultaneously being horrendously inadequate at communicating anything. It satisfies what we want, not what we need. Advancements like these present an odd Frankenstein of real time and archival conversation, a sort of uncanny valley of information where we know enough to be burdened by our own understandings of the subtext, but not enough to accurately analyze it. 

also three dots while typing ^

# Abbreviations and set phrases

Moving now to subtext produced by the actual content within a message, it's key to examine the use of selected abbreviations and set phrases. While all text abbreviations have literal translation, the situational usage of many common text abbreviations serves in a subtextual role more than a directly communicative one. One of the best examples of this is the abbreviation "LOL" meaning "Laugh out Loud". Presumably at some point this abbreviation was used to signal that you were actually laughing out loud, but over time it's usage has into a filler expression that is meant to signal the tone of a message. 

Let's take for example the message "I don't know what you're talking about" (for the time being, we'll ignore conversational context as a source of tonal information and look at the message on its own). When this message is spoken face to face we provide an immense amount of subtext through facial expression, body language, pitch inflection, cadence, etc. In messaging, we attempt to substitute these signals with simple pre-determined phrases, like LOL. To someone who has experience with the etiquette and traditions of messaging, the message "LOL, I don't know what you're talking about" communicates something quite different than a plain "I don't know what you're talking about". Here we use "LOL" to directly charge the entire phrase with a sense of levity. Because there are so many ways to interpret the text on its own, we need a bespoke way to give at least a very basic idea of the tone of the message. No one is laughing out loud, most likely it's not even necessarily a particularly funny situation. We use "LOL" to shield against an incorrect tonal interpretation of the message. It says "I'm probably not angry, or annoyed". Of course even within each abbreviation there's plenty of room for misunderstanding and some level of nuance, but we use abbreviations to give broad hints at what the tone of the message is. 

The set phrase, "haha", while not an abbreviation, is often used in a very similar way to "LOL". The difference being that there is some built in modularity, meaning that you can use it on a spectrum from just communicating levity, to genuine humorous. The spectrum ranges through "ha", "hah", "haha", "hahahahahahahah", "HAHAHAHAAHA". The first being general levity, the final perhaps meaning that you're actually laughing out loud, scaling respective levels of humor in between.

Punctuation also plays a big role here, and often in a very different way than in traditional text. The period for example, while generally purely functional in writing, can be one of the strongest emotional signifiers in messaging. Because periods aren't generally used in messaging, when you add one to the end of a message it's usually a direct signifier of tone. A period often signals annoyance, anger, or stubbornness. As in the message "I don't know what you're talking about." Because the period is generally such a neutral and utilitarian symbol, this may seem somewhat absurd if you're not intimately familiar with the culture of messaging, but the period is one of the most universally and directly understood signifiers in contemporary messaging subtext. The set phrase "K" (not OK, but just K) on its own as a response to a message can often carry a similar feeling or context. 

Conversely, the exclamation mark is appropriated in messaging as a symbol of excitement and positive tone. Unlike in traditional writing, it's almost universally used to signal positive tone. Even in our example case "I don't know what you're talking about!", the exclamation mark is most likely read with a sense of genuine surprise but willingness to cooperate, as in "I don't know what you're talking about, but let's figure it out". 

# Non text pictograms

Non text pictograms have a very similar use case to abbreviations and set phrases, the key difference being that they themselves have absolutely no traditional language context. Unlike abbreviations, phrases, and punctuation, they have no historical usage context to color our understanding of them in any way. They are new entities, created and used for messaging from the beginning. 

Note that we are not talking about "Emoji" here, which deserve their own separate essay, but rather pictograms made up of text elements, like the smily face with colon and parentheses ":)"

a few very common examples and my interpretation of them from my personal text history:

:)  - smiling face  - simply positively charged phrase/happy

:(  - frowning face - simply negatively charged phrase/sad

:'( - frowning crying face - sad/regretful - often used when the sender has made a mistake or is sorry, or consoling the recipient 

:') - smiling crying face - happy, proud, sentimental, genuine

;)  - winking smiling face - often understood as overtly or implicitly sexual. Playful, cheeky

Like abbreviations, each face here is used to color the tone of a message, and is often used to punctuate the end of a sentence, or as a separate single message on its own. The absence of these symbols in traditional text is key because it demonstrates another way that messaging uniquely provides subtext.

Note that these particular examples mostly fall directly into binary categories of negative or positive tone, not in a nuanced middle ground. While our contextual usage ultimately determines their meaning, the evolution of binary tonal classifiers here is out of necessity. There are so many ways to interpret messaging subtext that we need to start with very clear positive and negative signals, which are then contextually manipulated in more nuanced ways. 

The most important thing to understand here is that these are just the meanings that I personally have come to understand for all of these signifiers. There is no official meaning for LOL or periods at the end of messages, this is just what I have come to understand in my experience. It most certainly differs from other people's interpretations, and that's the point. We are using our own pre-determined interpretations of subtext elements, without realizing that they may be very different the understanding of whoever we are messaging. And compared to verbal and visual conversation, we have only this tiny amount of subtext to interpret. It's also worth considering that while we have a huge cannon of  examples the styles and conventions of writing (books) and speech (movies, tv, radio, and conversation) we almost never see examples of how other people text. The only points of data we have for how to text are from the people we personally talk to. Because of this isolation I would speculate that messaging, more than other communication mediums, produces an astounding amount of branching and unique tiny dialects. (Of course this idea would be much more appropriately explored through a research study rather than here)




# outro

these examples may all seem like minuscule and over read details of conversation to people who adopted messaging later in life, but for the ever growing population of people who have been messaging from early formative periods, these subtextual structures and traditions are extremely familiar. As we move through new eras of cyber ubiquity in communication, these subtextual elements continue to fork a new dialect from the traditional written word. What we must consider now is the implication of digital subtext, and our inadequacy at deciphering it. Since entering a post evolutionary stage of human existence we no longer have the million year luxury of physically and chemically adapting to new communication methods. Our evolved and precise interpretations of vocal inflections and microscopic speech pacing are not simply the result of cultural monoliths, but biological tools that we are born with. As we face the new task of decrypting the fragmented, stretched, and abstracted text that we used to communicate on a daily basis, we must keep in mind its core micro-incompatabilities with human expression. 

This is not however, a prescriptivist, or doomsday end point of thought. It's worth considering that while we now have practical and portable access to instant voice and video communication, we constantly and democratically re-elect messaging as a preferred standard of daily communication. Our use of messaging is not born from the influence or limits of technology, but a shared human choice, and something to be studied rather than simply lauded or dismissed. Messaging has long since invaded the innermost circles of mass communication, and rather than shun it, we can strive to understand its flaws and inner workings in an effort to reform our interactions with it. Simply investigating the ways in which subtext functions within this medium, and openly discussing our own non explicit communication patterns is enough to begin dismantling the social discomfort that lies at the core of many of messaging's issues. 

And one of the curious elephants in the room that sits at the end of this examination is the massively apparent convenience and practicality of messaging in many situations. It's easiest to see the flaws of the medium because all of the places where it's truly genius are relatively mundane every day interactions that we never give a second thought to. So along with a new awareness of subtextual communication in messaging, a final consideration for daily driving is what exactly we use messaging for. All of the difficulties with subtext in messaging relate to social interpersonal communication, but in so many situations, there's almost no subtext at all: we take advantage of time displacement and archival records to read a list of items to buy at the supermarket that someone texted us in the afternoon while we were at work and unavailable to take a call. For all the complexities of each communication medium, the ultimate consideration is merely which one best suites the occasion.

